Good morning, this is Tonya with you on KOBJFM's
news magazine, where our guest today is a city
planner. He's director of environmental studies
at St. Edward's University. We thought we'd ask
him to talk to us a bit about Austin moving into the
21st century. Our guest is Kevin Stowers. Hi,
Kevin. We're real glad you could be with us today.
Well, I'm glad to be here and glad you could ask me to
come out. I've been eager to talk a little bit about
Austin. Okay. What would you say are the major
urban problems that are facing the U.S. at this
point? Essentially, all of the good and bad things
that you might see in our society seem to be very
much congregated in our cities. It's kind of an
obvious statement. But on the other hand, if you
stop to consider the fact that we've only been an
urban society since roughly the 1940s, this is
really something of significance to suddenly see
that we may have to find a new future for our cities.
So are you saying that we've only been
predominantly urban since the 40s here in the US?
Oh, certainly. Really, in 1920, well over half the
population lived on farms. And if you stop to think
how many people you knew or any of us knew that grew
up on farms versus how many we know today that grew
up in cities, I think you can see this kind of shift
in trends. Of course, the real problems facing the
United States in many cases are problems facing
all cities across the world. What are we going to do
in terms of energy and technology in the future?
We're facing essentially a situation where
energy consumption patterns are being forced to
change. We don't have the oil that we once had and
relied on. We've really only gone through perhaps
two or three major energy technologies in the
history of man. We started out using wood. We
eventually switched to coal as wood began to run
short. And then we wound up going to oil in the 20th
century. And this isn't the first energy crisis we
faced in the US, and it's not the first energy
crisis in the world. Every time we see a change in
technology, we see all kinds of problems being
generated because of this. And we've generally
been very unsuccessful in predicting what the
future is going to have after these kinds of
changes. Well, are you saying essentially that
the problems we face here in any of our cities in the
U.S. then are going to be connected with the oil
shortage? Well, I think that that's one of the
problems we're facing, but we can't let energy per
se dominate all of our perspectives. We've still
got many of the same social and economic problems
that we really only began to try to solve with the
Roosevelt administration in the 30s and 40s. What
are some examples of those? Poverty. We still got
poverty. We still have poor people. In general, we
always look at the population and say the older
people seem to have more income problems. They
don't tend to be as well off. And old people tend to
live in cities. With our demographics, we see in
the future increasingly a larger and larger
percentage of our population is going to fall in
this elderly class. And somehow we have to begin to
deal with the fact that more of the workforce are
less, you know, the workforce is essentially
going to have to support a larger proportion of the
population through Social Security, food
stamps, Medicare, and a variety of other
programs. And this is going to be a very expensive
proposition. Well, maybe we're getting a little
bit abstract for all of us who are living here in
downtown Austin. Let's bring it back to Austin for
a moment. What would you say are the major problems
coming up in the next decade for Austin, Texas?
Well, I think you can look at the city budget or the
kind of issues that were raised by the city budget
debate this past month or so and see exactly what's
going to be ahead of us. There doesn't seem to be an
end in sight in terms of inflation. I don't think
it's going to be a rapidly cured event. And that's
going to affect you, it's going to affect me, it's
going to affect all of us in terms of our taxes.
Because if we want to continue to have the kind of
city that traditionally most of us think of Austin
as being, it's not going to be an inexpensive
proposition in the future. We're growing at a
tremendously rapid rate. And among the things
that are leading those inflation figures are such
things as land. And we tend to think of Austin as
being a pleasant place with lots of open space,
lots of parks, fairly reasonable traffic
situations, clean air, clean water. And those
things don't really come cheaply. There's an
economic cost associated with those. What
currently are the bases for taxation here in
Austin? How do you get taxed in Austin now? Well,
you get taxed almost every time you turn around. It
might seem a little facetious, but at the same
time, if you stop to think, every time you buy a
product that is not exempt, a portion of that sales
tax goes to Austin. You get taxed through your
property taxes. They tend to have in Austin a
rather extensive fee structure, which seems to be
broadening in terms of its scale. They're a
pay-as-you-go philosophy that most economists
would tend to support so that people recognize
that there is a cost associated with playing a
round of golf or being on a softball team and so
forth. All of these may not be taxes in terms of the
traditional sense, but they are part of the cost of
operating a city. Well, now, do you mean to say that
people who play golf are essentially being taxed?
Well, the golfer, per se, does pay a portion of what
it costs to operate that golf course and maintain
it. His fee for a round of golf doesn't pay for the
entire cost of maintaining that course. Part of
that comes from property taxes. And the people
that pay property taxes include not only the
people who own real property, that is, a house or a
lot... but also anyone who essentially rents a
residence in Austin or an apartment. Well, how do
renters end up paying the tax? Well, because
that's a cost that your landlord is not going to
absorb. He's in the business to make money, so he's
got to find a way to make enough money to cover the
cost of his mortgage, taxes, maintenance, and so
forth. And he's going to pass all that on in terms of
how much you pay for your rent. So is it fair then to
say that the... Increase in rents recently is a
result of the increase in property taxes. Oh, to
some extent, I'm sure that's true. But there are a
lot of things that go into determining how much you
pay for rent. And taxes are probably only a minor
part of it. A much larger part is the fact that there
are a lot of people moving to Austin. It's a
desirable place to live. And if all of a sudden the
occupancy rate is very high for apartments, It's
only obvious to the landlord that he can charge a
higher rate. He's going to try to charge what he can
get. So it's a supply and demand question. It's a
supply and demand question. And part of that is
taxes. The whole question of transportation is an
interesting one because I think that's a real
problem in Austin. It's going to be more of a
problem in Austin. The larger the city grows, the
harder it is to get around. You just simply have
more area to cover. You've got more territory.
You've got further distances. And essentially,
most of us don't like to spend a lot of time in our
car, yet we want to be absolutely free to make every
trip we desire to make. It's obvious as the city
gets larger that a couple of things have to happen.
And among them, it's likely that you're going to
see more freeways being built or interstate loop
radial type controlled access highways. you're
likely to see a little bit more emphasis being put
into your mass transit system simply because you
have a larger percentage of your population that
is not going to be able to utilize automobiles in
all of the trips. And that creates also additional
demands in terms of economy because, again, that
has to be paid for somehow. The federal government
provides a 50% operating subsidy to many
communities for mass transit. But the other 50%
subsidy has to come from somewhere. Some
communities have chosen to do that through a sales
tax that has essentially been dedicated to the
purpose of supporting transit. Other
communities simply try to support it out of
general revenue funds. That's what Austin is
doing. And this is part of the problem every year,
because all of a sudden, Austin comes up at the end
of the budget And we've got so many good projects
that need to be carried out that there's generally
going to be a higher expenditure than income. And
then the city council is faced with a very
difficult dilemma. Do we want to raise taxes or
user fees in order to accommodate that? Or two, do
we want to make some cutbacks in some of these very
beneficial, good programs? the last couple of
years the city council has taken the view that
maybe it's better to try to cut back and minimize
some of those services somewhat in order to be able
to avoid general tax increases well now is that the
reason why we don't really have very good mass
transit here in austin well that's only part of the
reason essentially You don't tend to have what
would be very good mass transit anywhere in North
America, and by that you can include Mexico,
Canada, as well as the United States. The real
reason we don't have good mass transit is that our
cities are designed for a transportation
technology that is basically balanced against
low density. In other words, we tend to emphasize
the need for single family detached housing.
Everybody wants to have a little quarter acre lot
or 10,000 square feet, you know, with five or 10
feet on the side yards. Everybody wants their
land. Everybody wants a little bit of land. And the
problem is that when you have these kinds of
housing patterns, that doesn't tend to
effectively feed, in an economic sense, a mass
transit system. It's very suitable in terms of an
automobile, but it's not very suitable for a bus or
light rail or even rapid rail, heavy rail transit.
And this is the real dilemma. Well, what is the
solution then for people who would like to be able
to use mass transit but don't want to give up their
suburban life? Well, that's almost a no-win
situation. It's a double-bind situation. I don't
think you can effectively have both. because
essentially you're going to pay a very high
subsidy. You're going to have very high taxes to
have good transit with large lot subdivisions, or
two, you're going to have to give up the large lot
subdivisions to have good transit. Well, are you
visionary enough to imagine another way of
building our city instead of in suburban lots?
Well, I don't have to be visionary, particularly
because people have been writing about this for
essentially at least 30 or 40 years. There are
alternatives, but we have to understand that the
economies of scale, the capacity of transit
systems vary according to how many people you can
expect to get on in a given area. In other words, how
many people can feed a station. Now, if you look at
our average southwest United States city, we
don't tend to have the kind of land use patterns
that accommodate that. We tend to have If a typical
subdivision is maybe a mile square, we might have
1,000 houses there. And so we've got maybe 2,300,
3,000 people living there. That's just not enough
to effectively operate a mass transit system.
Even if we run a bus through it, that still means
there's a good chance somebody's going to have to
walk a quarter or a half mile to get to it. And people
don't like to walk that far. The alternative is
probably going to be that we're going to see more
garden apartments, townhouses, and that can
support a more frequent transit system, whether
it's a light rail or an effective bus system. And I
think buses can do a very fine job of not advocating
any particular form of transit. What it means is
that we're simply going to have to see more people
in our cities living in a higher density pattern if
we're going to have effective transit. I think
given a very high cost of housing, which has
essentially excluded at least 60% and probably
close to 80% or 90% of the American families out of
traditional housing, combined with the energy
shortage, we're going to see eventually a change
in the direction of development in the future.
We're going to continue to see low-density
development because there will always be those
who can afford it. But we're not going to have
people being able to afford that in terms of the
mass traditional sense of the American culture.
I'm sorry, go ahead. I was going to say that
traditionally the high point in terms of
effective take-home pay for most workers was
during the 1960s. In terms of effective
purchasing power, they've never earned as much
since. Oh, I didn't know that. I wasn't making too
much in the 1960s, so I guess I just missed out. You
missed out on the peak. But essentially, with
inflation and the cost of living increases that
most workers have been given, their buying power
today is generally less than it was in, say, 64 or
67. Oh, is that right? It's disappointing, isn't
it? I can assure you it's disappointing because I
wasn't making very much in 64. One of the things
about Austin now is that there are still quite a lot
of open spaces still available to us, even though
it's getting big and there's a lot of people moving
in. We have, for example, Town Lake. We have a place
where within just a short drive you can be
essentially in a natural setting. Do you see those
kinds of areas being planned into the Austin of the
future? Well, let me say that I think that despite
some of our disappointments and traumas that we
see when the city council meets, I think overall
the city council and the city staff has really done
a fairly good job. They've got a lot of
limitations, they've got a lot of conflicts, but
you see a lot of forward-looking thinking. The
Parks Department, for instance, does tend to have
some very good people on its staff. tend to be very
oriented toward developing parks for the future.
Now, one of the real complaints is that, gee, we
don't see parks being developed. Well, part of the
reason is they're spending so much of their money
on acquisition of land, because they know if they
don't get the land today, given the difficulties
of the economy, there is very little chance
they're going to effectively acquire the land or
at least the necessary quantity of land in the
future. And they are making an effort. And they are
making a definite effort to do that. Oh, that's
great, isn't it? And this is one area which the city
voters have traditionally always supported in
terms of rather heavy referendum turnouts, that
they will vote to spend money to acquire parkland.
And I think that that's something that's
necessary if we're going to maintain... quality
associated with Austin that a lot of us tend to
think back and remember, say, from the late 60s or
early 50s or whenever it was that you happen to
remember your favorite Austin as being. Well,
then, do you think that there...
Does the city of Austin seem to be taking into
account the idea that we're going to have to have
more density, more apartments, more
condominiums? Well... Yes, but see, the real
problem is where are you going to put those,
because you tend to get a lot of resistance from
existing landowners and existing property
owners. There is a lot of conversion going on.
There is a lot of infill housing. You see a fair
amount of apartments being built. I think the city
staff recognizes this, and I think in general the
city staff and the city council are very aware that
Most of us, perhaps, or many of us, cannot afford to
continue to buy a four-bedroom house with a
swimming pool out back. And there is a real concern
that we've somehow got to fulfill the housing
needs of the population. And one of the ways to do
that is through lower economical housing styles,
and that is higher density by definition. There
doesn't seem to be as much willingness
traditionally among most homeowners to have a
townhouse or condominium or apartment go in
across the street from them. And they have some
very legitimate concerns, one of which is
property values. And this is one of the reasons you
see neighborhood associations being formed.
They are very concerned that in some cases the
entire character of their neighborhood is being
changed radically and that there is too much
attention being paid to the needs of these
newcomers or to the needs of speculators and
developers. And I can sympathize with both sides.
I don't think it's an easy solution for a city
councilman to go one way or the other. There has to
be a balance between the two. And I think that
inevitably what you tend to see is an increasing
percentage of your housing stock being devoted to
multifamily housing. Now, I could well be wrong in
this because the traditional direction of most
urban development has always been toward a
decentralization, toward lower densities. Part
of the problem is the U.S. Census Bureau hasn't
really told us what that 1980 census said. We have
some ideas what it probably said, but
traditionally from 1940 to 50 to 60 to 70,
continually, Cities tended to be centralized,
they tended toward lower densities. The city of
Austin has a viable downtown, and I don't mean to
discourage that notion, but on the other hand, it
is certainly a changing downtown, and it's much
less important to Travis County as a whole or the
city of Austin as a whole than it was perhaps 20 or 30
years ago. So you see, another issue for Austin in
the future might be to maintain the trend toward
revitalizing the Austin downtown. Oh,
absolutely. This is KOBJ-FM's News Magazine, and
we're speaking today with Kevin Stowers, who is
the Director of Environmental Studies at St.
Edward University and a city planner by
profession. Kevin, why don't you give us sort of a
summary of what you see as the major concerns for
Austin as we move into the future, when you look at
it from the city planner's viewpoint? Well, I
think that there are essentially perhaps five or
six kind of major concerns we have to have. One
deals with economics. Can we maintain an
effective and efficient and economical city
government? And at the same time, maintain the
quality of Austin that we would all like to see. And
in terms of quality, we can talk in terms of a
variety of issues. There are frequent community
hearings at various levels. And if you see a
proposal for a zoning variance being granted, the
city is very active and concerned about trying to
get input. They put little signs out front saying,
call this number if you're interested because
we're getting ready to see something happen on
this piece of property. You ought to call. You
ought to make your opinion known. And most of our
neighborhoods have neighborhood
organizations. Find out who they are and where
they are and go to the meetings. Because the future
of your neighborhood, your children, your
property is really very much at stake. And perhaps
you don't agree with everything I've said or see
happening in the future. But it's up to you to be
involved and make sure that your views are
represented. Because if you don't, the future of
Austin may not be really what you would like it to
be. Kevin, what would you say you would like to see
happen? What would you call a good Austin in the
future? Well, I think that there are perhaps two or
three things that I think that are essential for
our future. One is that I think that it's
imperative that we have a good, effective transit
system. I don't think that given the direction of
the energy problem that we see today that we should
be in a position of being concerned from a
year-to-year basis where the money for transit is
coming from. I think we have to have a dedicated
source of revenue for that purpose. I think we need
a more frequent transit service and expanded
routes. i also think that we effectively have to
maintain our park system our library system the
cultural life of austin essentially what has made
austin unique in character i can't tell you how
often when somebody moves to austin i've been told
they said they've been told that, gee, you're
going to really like Austin. It's really a nice
place. It's a good place to live. There are lots of
nice things about it. And I don't think any of us
want to lose that through economy. And by economy,
that would be false economy. I think we ought to be
efficient. I think we ought to be effective and
professional. But I don't think we want to lose the
essential character of Austin. And I think if we
began to cut back and particularly open space,
environmental quality, we're going to begin to
lose some of that unique character. Well, I'd have
to agree with you completely, but maybe the
devil's advocate would say, well, where are we
going to save money when the budget is so high that
people can't afford to pay their taxes anymore?
Well, There are always people that can't afford to
pay taxes. I would like to know exactly which
individuals so I can be sympathetic with them and
try to figure something out. The elderly now have
tax exemptions available. They may not be as much
as they should be, but it's certainly a beginning
step. Food is tax exempt. It should be. There are
states in the union where the sales tax does exist
on food, and I'm glad it doesn't in Texas. medical
care is exempted. There is an attempt to exempt at
least some of the most essential things. I think
the idea of a lifeline rate in terms of utilities
would be very beneficial for Austin because we see
essentially the tradition of utilities is to
encourage consumption. Many of our rates and many
utilities across the nation are designed
essentially with the intent of encouraging an
increase in consumption i don't think that's
proper today given our energy problems i think we
need to encourage conservation and by
effectively encouraging people to use less
electricity and giving breaks to those small
users we can help some of those people that are
having problems with their income and their
budgets. And I think that's one area that we can
give some assistance in. So you're essentially
saying that it is possible to keep the good life in
Austin and not have it taxed to death? Well, I hope
it is. It's more of a statement of faith on my part at
this stage, but I think it is. Well, this has been
enjoyable. Got a few new thoughts to think about in
terms of Austin, Texas, and I appreciate very much
you being with us today. Thank you so much. Thank
you for having me. This is Tonya Wells. I've been
speaking with Kevin Stowers on KOBJ-FM's News
Magazine.